this talk i've titled once around
orion's belt
and this is a photograph of the orion
nebula the most famous
uh cloud of gas and dust in astronomy
probably and
much photographed everybody can easily
find it because it's bright enough to
see
even without a telescope and makes a
very attractive picture
and this telescope my father will
recognize
because he helped me build it this is my
8-inch newtonian reflector
uh sat on the driveway at our house in
portsmouth you can see that the home
brew
arrangement made out of all sorts of
bits of greenhouse
and car wheel bearings making up the
axis
and so on i put this in because i took a
photograph
of orion with it which i've still got
and uh just wanted to show you that as a
way of setting the scene
here it is it's not in the best of
condition after all these years
but um you can still recognize the four
corner stars
here and orion's belts these three
across the middle
and the sword handle and even see that
perhaps the nebula there
is um
not just a star as of course a
photograph i took with a real
film camera held up against the
uh eyepiece of that eight inch telescope
uh with a guess at the exposure and then
i had to
develop the film myself in the school
darkroom because if you sent off a
negative containing
these sorts of images to the chemist
they would
decide to that there was nothing on them
or they would ruin them
in the attempt to make it into an
ordinary looking picture
so it just needed very careful
developing
but it's amazing that the photograph has
lasted as long as it has
and still shows the the same images
there
going back a little bit further this is
a star map
from china from 700 a.d the dun
huang star map and we can see in the
middle here that here is orion's belt
look
and the corner stars marked out
uh as well so you can definitely make
out orion
and i think this is probably uh serious
down here
but various other familiar star
groupings that you can make out on it
so it's a very recognizable
constellation and
very widely studied and recorded
we've got a photograph that i took a
little bit more recently than 1975.
uh this one is the view from my back
garden where my observatory is
with orion riding high there just above
the tree
and you can also see sirius off to the
left there the very bright star just
above the gate post
but um also invisible is the scourge of
astrophotography these days which is the
orange lights from the guided bus way
that's about two miles away
down towards suevecy there's a bus
station
where they persist in putting the lights
on um
and throwing all that nasty orange glow
up into the sky
and that picture was taken with this
little camera the nikon camera just a
two megapixel camera sat on the ground
and just pointed up with a about a 30
second exposure i think it was so
a nice little image just showing how
prominent orion always is
easy to recognize
slightly improved with a slightly better
camera this one belongs to my son
and again was taken with the camera on a
tripod
uh you get a lot more depth of the
image and a lot more color as well and
we start to see
something interesting here in that we
can see the
most of the stars are very blue in color
except for the top left-hand star
betelgeuse which is an orangey white
in this image and then of course the
orion nebula down here
looking nice and pink colored
so a better camera with a bigger lens
does a better job
now we can use orion to find our way
around the sky
it's very good sign post we often
navigate around the sky initially using
the tail and the plow of
ursa major to find our way to things
like
polaris but if you can see orion it
immediately orients you because of the
very prominent stars of orion's belt
turn left downwards and you get to
sirius
go up and right you get to older baron
in taurus
you can go diagonally and find caster
and pollux
up there in gemini or you can turn left
at the top corner and find
your way to pro scion so there are lots
of different sort of ways of using that
as a
navigational aid
but again we've got that same image here
of alpha orionis this uh
orangey-colored star at the top left
betelgeuse
and this is an actual image of the
surface
of betelgeuse because it's such a large
star a red supergiant
um and relatively close to the earth at
640 light years
it's one of the very few stars where
it's
large enough presenting a large enough
angle
that's the best astronomical telescopes
can now pick it up as a disc rather than
a point of light
having said that we are not entirely
sure how massive metal jars
is it's somewhere between 7.7
and 20 times the mass of our sun
you see this uh symbol here it means the
mass of the thing in the middle of the
solar system
um and then the solar system single i.e
the sun
so that's uh quite a wide range for a
very familiar star
and it also means we're not entirely
sure how old it is
if it's uh if it's 20 solar masses then
it's 8 million years old
and if it's 7.7 solar masses then it's
million years old because that's how
long it takes
for stars of those masses to
reach maturity and turn into these red
giant
phases now in the future
that does make a difference because if
it's a in the range at the bottom end
there
7.7 to 10.5
it won't explode as a
traditional core collapse supernova
but will instead form a planetary nebula
in a white dwarf
whereas if it's above 10.5 then that's
sufficient mass
for the full court collapse to occur so
we're not entirely sure which way it's
going to go
if it's up at the very high end of the
mass
range then it's also very very near
that final core collapse and every
wednesday when it's clear and we go out
and do our observing
we check to see if it's blown up yet for
that reason
but it's more likely to uh be another
million years or more before
anything extraordinary like that happens
however it has been misbehaving during
2019 and 2020
it underwent a very strange dimming
event you can see the two photographs
side by side here of orion
and i think you can tell that betelgeuse
has become
a lot fainter in color it's
rivaling the star at the diagonally
opposite corner in brightness
rigel down here in the first photograph
for overall brightness but
now in this one actually it's not even
second because
bellatrix here is probably brighter than
betelgeuse
and just zooming in and looking at it
there's a couple of uh
high resolution photographs of the disc
of petal just
showing how its brightness had changed
between uh just in a month
sorry no in a year uh january 2019 and
december 2019
and it looks like actually either there
were very large
star spots on the surface or
partly obscured by clouds of dust
and that cloud of dust could have been
orbital dust or it could have been dusty
material being ejected
off the surface and that's something
that these
old stars tend to do when they're in
their final stages so it led us to think
that maybe it was undergoing that uh
beginnings
of the process of either turning into a
planetary nebula or
um going for a full supernova explosion
here's the light curve of it and you can
see it dimmed down
quite considerably here by uh
going from magnitude 0.5 at the top
to 1.5 which is a factor of two and a
half
reduction in power output because of the
strange way that stellar magnitudes work
but then in february of 2020 it actually
brightened back up more or less to where
it started and returned
so we're not quite sure what was going
on but uh
there was definitely the detection of
some dust
now having said that it is a variable
star
and we have partial data going back some
time here
um showing how the
brightness of it ranges from um
about maximum peak of about 0.3
uh down to about one
over the last uh 20 or so years or
over a 20-year period here you can see
how it does dim
and brighten but the dimming went uh
even dimmer than
usual so perhaps a very extreme version
of whatever it is
that's causing the brightness here is a
cycle
now the other corner of orion you have
the bright star rigel
uh and this is i'm afraid not a
photograph but an artist's impression
but it's nevertheless
a very good one it's based on a
photograph of the sun that they've
colorized
but rigel is a blue supergiant rather
than a red supergiant
a little bit further away 860 light
years
and probably eight million years old and
we know that a little bit more
accurately because
rigel is a multi-star system and we can
plot the orbits
of the b and c components it's smaller
companions
that orbit around it in periods around
24 000 years
and wherever you have a companion and
you know the orbit you can compute the
orbit of the uh
motion of these multi-star systems then
by use of kepler's laws
you can work out the mass of the primary
and so we know
that rigel is at a mass of 21
solar masses and that limits its age it
must be
around 8 million years
to be in the stage that it's at
now it's a blue giant because it is
actively fusing
helium in its core uh whilst
overlaying that there is a layer of
hydrogen that is also undergoing fusion
followed by the outer envelope and
we can tell that it's doing that there's
a certain amount of dredge up that
occurs
and we see not only helium at the
surface
now enriched from the standard mix
of 25 that uh was created in the big
bang it's
it's up to 32 percent as uh rigel has
been making hydrogen into helium during
its life
but we're also seeing carbon nitrogen
and oxygen
formed in the process of that helium
being fused
to the next series of elements in this
core
looking ahead it's going to cool
slightly on its outer layers and become
a yellow supergiant
on its way then to becoming a red
supergiant
before finally dying in a core collapse
type 2 supernova
and it's uh very interesting that when
you see these giant stars
that have gone beyond the ordinary main
sequence
and have started to fuse other elements
they can be in one of two states
they can be in a state where the core
can contains an element that is being
actively
fused upwards to the next element so
in this case helium burning to carbon
or they can be in a stage where the
core is not yet hot enough to fuse
whatever it's made of
so a slightly earlier stage would be an
inert helium core
and the next stage is an inert carbon
core
once it's built enough carbon so what's
going to happen is
as it builds more carbon in the core
it will initially not not be at a
temperature
that carbon can go uh undergo fusion
and so you have a dead core
and so the overall energy output
compared to the overall mass of the star
becomes less
and so the temperature cools
and it'll therefore go from blue to
yellow
and then on to red until eventually
the mass of that core and the pressure
and temperature
reaches the ignition point for carbon
and then what happens is the red stars
shoot across the
temperature range again going through
that yellow giant stage
and back to becoming um blue hot again
while they have an active core so if
it's red
like betelgeuse it has an inactive core
and if it's
yellow or blue then it's got a an active
one
uh this was a sort of discovery that i
understood fairly recently
looking at the other corner stars safe
down at the bottom
left hand corner of iran also around 650
light years so the same distance
as uh betelgeuse 15.5
solar masses again we we know that
rather precisely
and 11 million years old so a little bit
less massive than rigel and slightly
more slower burning
but it'll undergo that same evolutionary
track
and top right bellatrix
and that is 244 light years from earth
so it's
that considerably nearer and
lighter weight at 8.6 solar masses
and 25 million years old it's also in
that post main sequence stage
and will evolve into a classical red
giant
and then the yellow cepheid variable
stage
when the helium core ignites and starts
to form carbon
and then back to being a red uh
asymptotic giant
branch star an agb star when
it's building an inert carbon oxygen
core
and then i think it's probably done for
because
at 8.6 solar masses it can't really go
any further
and that's also under that 10 and a half
solar mass
limit so this one won't uh undergo
formation of a core collapse supernova
and probably will yield a planetary
nebula
and quite a late stage uh highly
developed
white dwarf stars because it's nearing
that limit so
it'll be a carbon neon type
white dwarf star
so here we go back to a picture of uh
the constellation of orion
uh just got serious sneaking onto the
picture at the left-hand side there i'm
just going to show you where a few of
the objects that i like to look at in
this part of the sky are
the first one technically it's not
actually in orion it's in the next door
constellation of monoceros the unicorn
but as with most unicorns you can't find
monoceros it has no bright stars in it
but it does have the unicorn's breath
coming out of its mouth
which when you look at it with a
telescope or do what i've done here
which is use a long camera lens a
300 millimeter camera lens riding
piggyback
on my main scope so not looking through
the telescope optics just using the
camera lens
and that's because this is a object
that's five degrees across on the sky
the full moon
would sit in this bubble in the center
and this bubble in the center is where
the hot young stars
are blowing away the remaining hydrogen
gas
out of which they formed this was
um a star-forming nebula about
15 million years ago it's now
just about at the point where no new
stars are going to be formed
because the hot uh blue and white
stars are blowing away the gas and
reducing the density so that
no new ones can be made so that's the
rosette nebula let's pop that back
up there
and of course the orion nebula itself
down there in the orion
sword this is again a cat a piggyback
camera shot i quite like doing
astrophotography just with the camera
riding
on top of the main scope you can get
some very nice wide field shots
so this is the hole of orion's sword
with the nebula in the middle there
that's back into there
if we look in a little bit uh greater
color depth here on this image of the
orion nebula
we can bring the a better view of it up
here this is the one that was on the
title slide of this talk and you can see
how
we've got uh the bright white stars in
the middle
lighting it all up the dark dusty lanes
here
coming across in front extra little
region here
that looks like pac-man but that's
called
m-43 it doesn't have a common name
itself
and all of the fine detail around the
outside
bringing that up to full there it is in
all its glory
so you can really see how far out it
goes when you look with a small
telescope like the uh
eight inch uh that i opened with my home
brew telescope from 1985 with the eye
you tend to just see this bright bit in
the middle here
with the dark dust lane taking a chunk
out of it
but the more powerful telescope the
further out you can see so often you
can see sort of a much larger region
like this with maybe a
11 or 12 inch telescope and of course
the camera sees more than the eye
with this long exposure photograph so we
start to go
way out to an extra distance so it
really does become
quite a large object it fills the field
of view
of my uh camera on the telescope
so we'll pop that back into orion there
where it comes from
another view again with a wide-angle
telescope
um different cameras but this one i've
put this on
on because a few years ago i was visited
by a professional photographer
that um carolyn crawford professor
carolyn at the institute of astronomy
um was contacted by this chap who wanted
to take some astro
photographs um and she directed him to
me
and it turned out he had real film uh
from the uh leftovers from the photo
reconnaissance people from
world war ii and he had just a few reels
of this infrared sensitive
film for night photo reconnaissance
and he wanted to try taking some
astrophotography
images with it to see if it would work
so he uh
brought the camera that worked with it
around
um to my observatory and we mounted it
again piggyback
on the main telescope and went for a bit
of our guesswork
to try to take some pictures and the
following
image i'm going to blend in here is the
orion nebula taking
in infrared light with the uh
infrared film from 1945
vintage and it was probably the one
really good image that we got off a
whole roll that we used
because we were guessing uh exactly what
exposure to to use and so on
you can actually see it's got more
detail in it if i
go back than the optical
camera digital camera image so again
that lovely blend
of the two of them and then the nebula
seems to get
larger because the infrared film is
picking up more
of the cool gas around the outside
now if you dive right into the orion
nebula with professional
telescopes the amount of detail that is
in there is absolutely phenomenal
and here is just some of those uh cloudy
regions
a few few of the brightest stars and
lots of little regions labeled hh
something
these are the very famous uh
herbig harrow objects and they've each
been given a number here so
not some of the numbers go into the 300s
what these are are proto stars that have
been
formed in the stellar nursery
and are in the process of accreting
in a accretion disk whirling around
falling in
gradually building the star and in some
cases
shooting out jets of material
along their spin axes which are creating
some of these
amazing structures that you can see
there's all sorts of different
linear features within here and arcs and
so on
let's go in a little bit more detail on
hh-34 you zoom right in with the hubble
space telescope
the star is right in the center here
forming behind this
very dense region of dust and gas
out of which it's been born and you can
see the jet
coming in this direction out from it to
the right
and then forming a shock wave
where the jets energy is plowing into
the stationary
matter of the dust cloud and again you
can see the shock wave where
the jet that's hidden is coming to a
stop over here
and you can even see how it's been
moving and spinning
across space and leaving the trail of a
shock wave behind
i think that's a fantastic image of star
forming
in motion
you can also see a lot of these
protoplanetary disks
where you have the star at a slightly
more formed stage in the center
but nevertheless surrounded by the dust
and gas of its
uh birth nebula and then in that
proto-planetary disk new solar systems
of planets are still in the process of
gathering together and forming uh
there's dozens of these
in the orion nebula that we can now see
and you can imagine how these are going
to turn
into different planetary systems some of
these down at the bottom have seen edge
on
so you can see the dust that is going to
form a flat
plane of a solar system in these ones
here
quite easily others we've got a more of
a polar view
so we're looking down on the star and
you can see into the center
where the star is and the ring of dusty
material around it so
you can put all of that information
together and confirm
what we're saying about the the way that
planets form
in these rings around stars
now here we've got uh the very famous
horsehead nebula
a dirty dusty swirling cloud of gas
here moving across in front of
some glowing gas in the background
and we've got the flame nebula up here
the flame nebula and the background gas
are being lit by the powerful
ultraviolet light coming from
this bright star here this is alni
attack
and it's the left hand star of orion's
belt
so these other gas regions are at the
same distance from us
as alma attack and the horsehead nebula
is a little bit nearer
also notable are some of these other
bright stars in this little cluster here
um these are also very hot white
uh young stars so there's a bit more
detail
on the horse head nebula and the flame
nebula some photos that i took here
and another wider shot in color so
there's an attack and you could see
actually where my telescope wasn't
perfectly collimated
because that um out of focus ring should
be right around the middle of the star
not off to one side so the mirror had
moved a little bit
but nevertheless the flame nebula on its
side down here
and the colour shows that red color from
the
emission line of hydrogen at six five
six point two eight nanometers the
hydrogen alpha line
and again the same color for this ribbon
of gas here
and the lovely horse head nebula
also in orion we have another type of
nebula again associated with
a hot blue star this is messier's object
number 78
not one of my photos this is a
professional one the star itself has
formed
inside this cloud of gas and you can't
see it because it's behind this really
thick dense region here
but it's blown a bubble a cave inside
where it's formed pushing the material
away with its radiation pressure
and it's lighting up the inside of the
cave with its
blue white light due to its very high
temperature
and we're seeing that light bouncing
back to us
it's called a reflection nebula and this
is another one
this is called the witch head nebula and
it's
part of a band of material
that is glowing in the reflected light
of that blue supergiant rigel down at
the bottom
right hand corner of orion
looks a little bit like the face we've
got their big nose here point pointy
nose mouth
chin and the eye sockets up here and
part of the chest here very large object
actually
again several degrees across so quite
difficult to photograph
if the telescope you're using got a long
focal length
then you can't get the whole thing in in
one go
but here's orion's belt in true glory
with the three belt stars
and again down here we've got alan
attack with the flame nebula
actually the horsehead nebula is hiding
behind the banner there
but there's that streamer of uh hydrogen
so alnitak alnilam and mintarka the
three stars
of orion's belt and they're often
overlooked
because the uh attention is always given
to betelgeuse
and rigel but these three stars
nevertheless really quite interesting
systems in their own right
so if we go to the top right one mintaka
turns out this is a quintuple star
system
and it's got some very massive blue
stars
in it um you can see the solar masses
listed there
aa1 so the most
powerful component 24 solar masses
a b at 22.5
and aa2 at eight solar masses are all
fairly large stars
and then there's one that for some
reason hasn't got itself a proper
designation yet
must have been fairly recently
discovered another nine
solar mass star also a blue
white giant round about 8 million years
old again we know that from the evolved
state of the larger stars in the group
and it's 1200 light years away so it's
actually
twice as far away as the likes of
betelgeuse and
safe and bella while bellatrix is quite
a lot nearer
and that's why we don't see it as the
brightest star in orion because with the
power output of this lot
if it wasn't the same distance it would
be very bright indeed
and it's also got just one little tiny
extra companion
that's about 60 percent the mass of our
sun
orbiting around with these enormous
giants so
uh anybody living on this on planets
around this
star here um is going to be in for a
rude shock when all four of these blow
up
um uh or at least uh two of them are
going to blow up as
enormous type two core collapse
supernovae
and the other two were going to explode
out to be red giants
and uh give off their outer layers as
planetary nebulae
due to their slightly reduced mass
ounce lamb though in the center of
ryan's belt
is even larger because it's single
we don't know its mass very accurately
but it's somewhere in the range 30 to 65
solar masses
um and it's even further away at 2 000
light years
and we're guessing its age at about 5
million years
that's on the basis that it's at 30
solar masses
uh if it was 65 solar masses it probably
wouldn't last more than a million years
in its total lifetime
because the lifetime of a star
reduces very very rapidly with the
uh increasing mass it's uh
related really to the inverse square of
the mass
or possibly even a little worse
so this is a real uh monster star and we
often talk about
um betelgeuse being due to explode as a
supernova
there's every chance that al-nilam will
beat it to it
because of its higher mass and therefore
much shorter lifetime
and finally alan attack the one that's
next to those nebulae that we looked at
again photograph here with the flame
nebula
going out to much greater detail
this is also a triple star system with a
solar mass monster a 14 solar mass
and another 33 solar mass monster
so again these are 1200 light years plus
away
that's why they're not as bright as the
nearer
components of orion and around about six
to seven million years old
so again heading towards the late stage
it won't be long before they start
undergoing uh the
final stages going through the yellow
and red giants
and supergiant stages and then blowing
up
as core collapse and
i just want to uh look further at one
more point
about orion's belt and that is the
hypothetical connection as
potentially unproven that the pyramids
of giza in egypt have got something to
do with
the layout on the ground of them
something to do with
the stars of orion's belt
there's a curious coincidence here's an
aerial view of those pyramids
with the slight kink in the line here
they're not absolutely straight
and the distance between them matches up
really rather well
with the placement of the three stars
of orion's belt and
it's interesting in that probably uh 5
years ago or more when the pyramids were
being built
it's possible that they'd moved slightly
and even that
mintaka wasn't quite as bright as the
other two
and as potentially explains rather
why the third pyramid there is a bit
smaller
and various people have also suggested
that the placement of this
and certain other pyramids within the
region that uh
outliers line up with the other corner
stars
of orion and that the way that uh
the river nile runs down the side of
orion
might also be uh sorry the river nile
runs down the side
of um the uh pyramids
and their placement relative to it might
also be significant because
this is a very deep photograph of
orion showing a feature called barnard's
loop here running down this side here in
this curve
which is a very large streamer of
hydrogen
gas and so if the egyptians had very
sharp eyes and
they would have had no light pollution
problems they would probably be unable
to see this
and maybe this is represented on the
ground as the river nile
relative to these three stars and they
placed their pyramids accordingly
of course this is hypothetical we don't
really know if it's
related in that that same way but it's
an intriguing
correspondence i love this photograph
because it shows down the orion nebula
down here
this is the witch head nebula that i
showed you uh
lit up by the light of rigel here so
quite a long distance between them but
nevertheless
it is reflecting back that light
and tremendous detail in these images
so i do hope you all get a chance to get
out there with your binoculars and try
and track down some of these
lovely sights in orion or a telescope if
you've got one
and i recommend using a camera mounted
piggyback with a wide angle lens
as a way to take some really lovely
shots like this one
it's absolutely fantastic the way that
some of the detail comes out
and there is the whole of the
constellation with that lovely barnard's
loop in it
um here's betelgeuse at the top right at
the bottom
and this huge cloud of hydrogen
surrounding
all of these little tiny extra star
cluster
members which is kind of orion's head up
at the top here
so you can see there's just so much more
you can go and discover
so thank you very much i hope you've
enjoyed that and do get
out and do some stargazing it looks like
it might be
clear here this evening so i might have
a go myself